Now the question is,
what happens when we use const to
remember a value that itself is mutable?
Like an array,
we said an array can be changed, right?
So let's take a look at this example,
we have a line here in line one
const operands, which is the fancy word
for stuff an operator does stuff to.
[LAUGH] Technical terms here [LAUGH] so,
operands is an array with 4 and 6 in it.
And then, sum is gonna be
operands[0] + operands[1], so
what do you think the value
of sum is going to be?
>> 10.
>> 10, okay, and
both of these are consts, but
when I am working with an array,
we said that we can change the array,
right?
So, I can replace something in the array,
for
example operand [0] = 5
what is that gonna do?
This is the question, is it going to
listen to the array being mutable,
or is it gonna listen to
the const being immutable?
What is JavaScript gonna do here?
>> I figure it'll let it
overwrite the 4 with the 5.
>> So, we have a couple of guesses that
JavaScript is gonna be okay with replacing
what was previously at index zero
which was a 4 with the new thing we
want which is a 5.
Any other guesses to what's
going to happen here?
And then the question is if we asked for
a new value newSum,
it's doing the same operation as before.
It's looking at operands [0] and
adding it to operands [1],
question is what is that gonna be?
So let's take bets,
what are we betting on?
>> 11.
All right,
we got a couple of dollars on the 11 horse
in the race here, any other guesses,
anybody think it's gonna stay 10?
>> Maybe 15, it wouldn't matter
[LAUGH] even though, would it?
>> I mean with JavaScript
sometimes you never can tell
when it's gonna do something
completely unexpected.
All right let's go through it
line by line, so operands [4,
6] let's just double check, great.
Okay, then we're gonna get our sum and
we should expect it to be 10,
all right, so far so good.
Now moment of truth operand [0] = 5, okay.
The value of this whole expression is just
evaluated to the value
I was asking it to do.
Remember we said before JavaScript
will even do sometimes when it hasn't
done anything.
So, the question is,
what is newSum gonna be?
Let's find out, it is indeed 11.
So, let's go back to our whiteboard and
talk about what happened here.
So, we said,
let me just erase that variable,
we said that when we
create const variables,
we create an indelible link to the value.
So, we had here, I can't remember
what I called the operands, okay?
We had operands declared with consts that
points to an array, with some stuff in it.
And that association is immutable,
operands is always gonna
point to this array.
But we say that arrays themselves
JavaScript can do all kinds of stuff with,
and it can make changes
to what is in that array.
So initially, this was a sorry,
I think it had just two things in it and
it was 4 and 6.
And then we said, hey, JavaScript,
whatever was at index zero previously
Right here, there was a little index 0,
my goodness.
Right here,
there was little index 0 pointing to 4,
whatever was there point
it to something else.
In this case, there's a 5 over
here somewhere in JavaScript land,
and what I want you to do is forget
what was at index 0 before and
make the new thing at index 0 be 5 now.
And you can just forget
about that old index 0, so
even though the array
itself hasn't changed,
we had the one there too,
we haven't done anything to it.
Even though the array itself hasn't
changed, the notion of what's
inside of it has, so the array is mutable,
we can still mess with it.
But operands will always point to
that particular array, we can't for
example, reassign it to a new array
that we've created with contact, for
example, does that make sense?
So, we have to distinguish here between
the immutability of const variables and
the mutability of values that
we might assign to them.
So it is possible to have an immutable
reference, an immutable pointer,
immutable arrow to a mutable value.
So we can still mess with the thing,
the array in this case, cool?
Gotta love computers, they're super
weird sometimes, yeah, all right.
I will make this statement, [LAUGH]
which is that, in general if you want
your life to be as easy as possible when
you have the choice keep things immutable.
I have another course on Frontend Masters
called functional programming first steps
where we talk a lot more about
this about why immutable data
is generally a programmer's friend and
why mutable data can be tricky.
Can anybody guess at why I
might say that it is generally
better if you have the choice.
It is generally better to
work with immutable data and
variables as much as possible, any idea
why that might be why might I say that?
>> Because it probably
breaks a lot of processes,
if an underlying value changes-
>> If an underlying value changes and
you didn't expect it to change
because you thought that it was gonna
stay that way forever.
And maybe your co-worker or you in the
future that forgets what happened goes in
and changes it in a way
that you didn't expect.
You're gonna have a bad time,
you're gonna get bugs in your code,
you're gonna have unexpected,
undefined and things like that.
So, Immutability is really helpful in a
lot of ways and that's why for example in
functional programming which is something
we're not gonna talk a ton about here.
But you could take a whole bunch of
other courses out there including mine
on Frontend Masters, but there's other
courses on Frontend Masters too.
Immutable data is a way to make sure
that you're not accidentally gonna
shoot yourself in the foot.
It's a way to make sure that that things
are not gonna change out from under you.
Now we don't always have the choice,
for example in JavaScript it's
a little tricky to work with
an array that you can't ever mutate.
There isn't really a built-in concept for
that, there's an asterisk on that,
there are ways that you can sort
of make sure to freeze an array,
put it on ice so
that you can't mess with it.
But in general,
if you have the choice between, let's say,
working with lead and working with const.
And it doesn't matter because you don't
think this is ever gonna change this
value, use const.